# NFL Longevity Predictor
Longevity Predictor for players in the NFL based on Combine Data

# Midterm Project Checkpoint

Our project is to make a model that can predict how long a player can play in the NFL using data from the NFL combine. There has been research that has concluded that it is possible to predict player performance and career longevity using past results from the NFL Combine *(Asprey & Foley)(Vincent, 2019)*. The NFL combine is one of the most significant tools used by scouts today to help determine who they should draft for their team. They administer a series of physical tests to each player in order for them to create a scouting report to help determine if they are qualified for the position *(Hedlund, 2018)*. Over time as the NFL grew, there have been questions on whether a player's performance in the Combine has a correlation to how well they succeed and last in the league *(LaPlaca, 2020)*. If that correlation does exist, is it possible to use the players' Combine reports to determine how new players coming into the NFL will fare *(Pollock, 2021)*. Our goal is to create a Combine predictor to determine the future of the new NFL class. We want to be able to look at these young players and predict how their careers will pan out and hopefully quantify their fitness to assist with NFL scouting. This can help us pick players we believe will stay in the league long and do well so teams can get a good return on investment. 

Currently, we have finished cleaning all of our data and have run a neural network, support vector machine and deep learning model on our data, both with the intention of detecting how many games these players will play in their NFL career. We decided to use these models because research indicates that these models are most suitable for sports performance prediction *(Şimşek, M., & Kesilmiş, 2022)*. The data we are working with includes all players drafted from 2000-2012. The reason we use this range is so that the players we are running our models on have been in the NFL for a long period of time and not just starting their career. This is important because we have a better understanding of the entire career of a player, and exactly how long they last in the NFL, allowing us to make more accurate predictions about new draftees. When cleaning data, we focused on a few facts. First, we took out players that only had two or less stats reported, meaning they only participated in at most two events at the combine. We took these players out because they do not provide us enough data to make accurate predictions. If players participated in more than two events but were still missing an event or two, we predicted the results for these events using the average by position for each test. For example, if a running back was missing the 40 yard dash, we assigned the average 40 yard dash of the running back group to them as their 40 yard dash value. This is how we dealt with missing features. We also ran PCA on our features in order to reduce the dimensionality we are working with. We did this to use only the features that affected our results the most so that our models ran faster and they were easier to visualize on a graph. Second, we added an attribute of position to each player. We did this because each position has different combine statistics on average, and some positions do not run certain events. For example, quarterbacks do not bench. Therefore, we grouped quarterbacks together so that we cound ensure that bench press did not have an affect on their overall predicted years in the NFL. Similarly, a longer 40 yard dash time should not affect the output for a lineman as much as it should for a wide receiver, because linemen do not have to be as fast. Labeling by position helped out with that. Once our data was cleaned, we ran our models on it using google colab. Currently, we are at 97% accuracy on our neural network predictions of our test data. While our SVM and deep learning models are not there yet, we are still testing them and doing feature reduction to increase these percentages.

Once we have this relationship, we should be able to give an estimate of a new player in the draft. The metrics that we will use to show this are how many games they will play, and the time that they will play. We can then use these to predict what players we would want to draft based on what the stats show. Looking into how we can apply that today, we can look at how players that have recently been drafted, such as George Pickens, Kenny Pickett, and Breece Hall, will sustain in the current NFL given how well they did in the combine. Looking into the future, we should be able to quantify how many seasons a player like Jeff Sims will last once he does his draft and see if he looks like someone worth drafting. 

# Project Proposal 
Our project is to make a model that can predict how long a player can play in the NFL using data from the NFL combine. There has been research that has concluded that it is possible to predict player performance and career longevity using past results from the NFL Combine *(Asprey & Foley)(Vincent, 2019)*. The NFL combine is one of the most significant tools used by scouts today to help determine who they should draft for their team. They administer a series of physical tests to each player in order for them to create a scouting report to help determine if they are qualified for the position *(Hedlund, 2018)*. Over time as the NFL grew, there have been questions on whether a player's performance in the Combine has a correlation to how well they succeed and last in the league *(LaPlaca, 2020)*. If that correlation does exist, is it possible to use the players' Combine reports to determine how new players coming into the NFL will fare *(Pollock, 2021)*. Our goal is to create a Combine predictor to determine the future of the new NFL class. We want to be able to look at these young players and predict how their careers will pan out and hopefully quantify their fitness to assist with NFL scouting. This can help us pick players we believe will stay in the league long and do well so teams can get a good return on investment. The data set we are working with tracks every player's Combine stats, such as 40-yard time and verticals in the last 35 years. We then use that dataset to compare it with the same players' NFL stats focusing on those that prove sustainability and success, such as snap count, years played, games played, and pro bowls. The methods we were thinking of applying included SVM (Support Vector Machines) using classification and regression since research indicates that this model is suitable for sports performance prediction *(Şimşek, M., & Kesilmiş, 2022)*. Some of the results we are looking for are to create a relationship between players scouting reports to their pro bowls and longevity. Once we have this relationship, we should be able to give an estimate of a new player in the draft. The metrics that we will use to show this are the number of Probowls that a new player will probably receive, how many years they will play, and the time that they will play. We can then use these to predict what players we would want to draft based on what the stats show. Looking into how we can apply that today, we can look at how players that have recently been drafted, such as George Pickens, Kenny Pickett, and Breece Hall, will sustain in the current NFL given how well they did in the combine. Looking into the future, we should be able to quantify how many seasons a player like Jeff Sims will last once he does his draft and see if he looks like someone worth drafting. 

## References
- Asprey W L, Foley B M, Makovicka J L.A 10-year evaluation of the NFL combine. Do combine results correlate with career longevity for NFL offensive players? Phys Ther Rehabil 202078doi: 10.7243/2055-2386-7-8 [Google Scholar]
- Vincent LM, Blissmer BJ, Hatfield DL. National Scouting Combine Scores as Performance Predictors in the National Football League. J Strength Cond Res. 2019 Jan;33(1):104-111. doi: 10.1519/JSC.0000000000002937. PMID: 30358695.
- Şimşek, M., & Kesilmiş, İ. (2022, January 1). Predicting athletic performance from physiological parameters using machine learning: Example of Bocce Ball. Journal of Sports Analytics. Retrieved October 8, 2022, from https://content.iospress.com/articles/journal-of-sports-analytics/jsa200617 
- Pollock, Jordan Riley et al. “Can NFL Combine Results be Used to Estimate NFL Defensive Players Longevity?.” Sports medicine international open vol. 5,2 E59-E64. 10 Aug. 2021, doi:10.1055/a-1485-0031
- LaPlaca, David A, and Bryan A McCullick. “National Football League Scouting Combine Tests Correlated to National Football League Player Performance.” Journal of strength and conditioning research vol. 34,5 (2020): 1317-1329. doi:10.1519/JSC.0000000000003479
- Hedlund, David P. “Performance of Future Elite Players at the National Football League Scouting Combine.” Journal of strength and conditioning research vol. 32,11 (2018): 3112-3118. doi:10.1519/JSC.0000000000002252

## Project Timeline Chart and Task Assignment 
[https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/12l_n6g7ghG1ML6eQuEH1AFo9VHdABnvW6aZxb_c0lxE/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/12l_n6g7ghG1ML6eQuEH1AFo9VHdABnvW6aZxb_c0lxE/edit?usp=sharing)
## Contribution Table
- Ahmed: Created Github Page and did literature review 
- Shonjoy: Created Proposal Video 
- Rohan: Researched Potential Datasets for Model and worked on Proposal Write Up in collaboration with Shantanu
- Joe: Created Gantt Chart to organize Project deadlines
- Shantanu: Researched Potential Datasets for Model and worked on Proposal Write Up in collaboration with Rohan

## Project Proposal Video
[https://youtu.be/eD4rLBb4FOw](https://youtu.be/eD4rLBb4FOw)

## Dataset(s)
[https://nflcombineresults.com/nflcombinedata.php?year=1987&pos=&college=](https://nflcombineresults.com/nflcombinedata.php)
